# cagov cron jobs

This repository is used to process data and output data files, primarily & initially for the covid19.ca.gov website.

## Contents of this repository

* `common` — shared assets
* `common/SQL` - all Snowflake SQL queries
* `common/slackBot` - Post messages to Slack.
* `common/snowflakeQuery` - Use the [Snowflake NodeJS driver](https://docs.snowflake.com/en/user-guide/nodejs-driver.html) to run a SQL query and return results.
* `common/schemaTester` - Take a JSON file and test validation using a [JSONschema](https://www.npmjs.com/package/jsonschema) file.
* `Covid*` - FaaS data pipelines and cron job triggers
* `qnacrawler` - Question & Answer scraper that scrapes website and pulls Q&A into a database that is made accessible to Google Search Results.
* `perfMonitor` - Lighthouse performance monitoring. Publishes reports to Slack.

## Data publishing pipelines

* Data is generally hosted in a number of different [Snowflake](https://www.snowflake.com/) databases.
* We use the Snowflake API to retreive the data, and nodeJS based script processes that run using Azure FaaS processes.

These are the main components for our published datasets:

* **Snowflake tables & views.** Views and tables that are managed upstream. 
* **Schema tests.** The datasets we aggregate are generally sourced by data generated by many organizations and updated frequently, and can change. To ensure that public websites see the most accurate and high quality information, we created schema tests for our data inputs and outputs. This helps to ensure that we are getting data we expect, and delivering data in reliable formats.
* **Sample data.** We periodically capture date stamped sample datasets. Example: `common/SQL/CDT_COVID/Daily-stats-v2/schema/tests/output/pass/2021-02-25.json`.
* **Meta content.** General information about a dataset. The structure of the `meta` content is based on modern data documentation standards for data packages. We have a simple collaborative data management database (CSV > collaborative spreadsheet > API > NodeJS > `meta` data files > `*.meta` in output JSON file.) This includes publishing schedules and other critical details. We periodically merge any revisions to a `meta` file back into our tracking spreadsheet. Example `coming soon! 🌈`. Since pipeline metadata is published on a per-project basis, you can also look to the main website repo for full context, images, implementation and usage of the datasets. [Datasets](https://airtable.com/shrRRgKjMPZFkldGy), [Metadata](https://airtable.com/shrYZ16aIF7jlP2d0)
* **Trigger scripts.** We use [Microsoft Azure FaaS services](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/functions) to retrieve specific datasets & publish the data to an external git repository.
Example [`CovidEquityData/index.js`](./CovidEquityData/index.js) publishes to [`https://github.com/cagov/covid-static/tree/master/data/reviewed/equitydash`](https://github.com/cagov/covid-static/tree/master/data/reviewed/equitydash), which then moves to the covid19.ca.gov static file server [`https://files.covid19.ca.gov/data/reviewed/equitydash/cumulative-california.json`](https://files.covid19.ca.gov/data/reviewed/equitydash/cumulative-california.json).
* **Function triggers** Part of Microsoft, these settings control how the service runs. We can pull the `schedule` from the git repo and sync our data management database so that our team has an accurate look at current publishing schedules, and can keep track of different cycles with an ever-growing number of datasets in our pipeline. Example `/Users/chachasikes/Work/ca.gov/Cron/CovidStateDashboard/function.json`.
* **Schedule** Our scheduled jobs are with ncrontab expressions. 
    * [Decoder tool](https://crontab.cronhub.io/), Example: `0 22 16 * * *` > "At 04:22 PM"
    * [Ncrobtab interpreter](https://ncrontab.swimburger.net/) 
    
    Example: 
    
    `0 21/30 16-18 * * *` > 
"Every 30 minutes, starting at 21 minutes past the hour, between 04:00 PM and 06:59 PM" 
@TODO confirm timezone.

```2021-03-17 16:21:00
2021-03-17 16:51:00
2021-03-17 17:21:00
2021-03-17 17:51:00
2021-03-17 18:21:00
2021-03-17 18:51:00
2021-03-18 16:21:00
2021-03-18 16:51:00
2021-03-18 17:21:00
2021-03-18 17:51:00
```

### General guidelines for structuring datasets

* Keep the datasets *modular*, they may be reused in multiple locations
* We use **all caps for variable names**, which matches the data used by data providers.
* We use **lowercase for JSON attributes** wherever possible.

## SQL queries

We isolate all our SQL queries so that we can quickly and easily share and track which data we are ingesting.

## Schema tests
How our SQL folders are structured:
* `common/SQL/{Database}/{Dataset}/{name}.sql` - SQL file (Snowflake)
* `common/SQL/{Database}/{Dataset}/schema/input/schema.json` - Input JSON Schema
* `common/SQL/{Database}/{Dataset}/schema/output/schema.json` - Output JSON Schema
* `common/SQL/{Database}/{Dataset}/tests/input/pass/sample.json` - Sample test file
* `common/SQL/{Database}/{Dataset}/tests/input/pass/sample.YYYY-MM-DD.json` - Date stamped sample file (prior versions for permanent reference.)
* `common/SQL/{Database}/{Dataset}/tests/input/fail/{name}.json` - Failing input cases to check validation
* `common/SQL/{Database}/{Dataset}/tests/output/pass/sample.json` - Sample of expected dataset output.
* `common/SQL/{Database}/{Dataset}/tests/output/pass/sample.YYYY-MM-DD.json` - Date stamped sample file (prior versions for permanent reference.)
* `common/SQL/{Database}/{Dataset}/tests/output/fail/{name}.json` - Failing output cases to check validation

## Schema validation prep

* Pull a sample .tsv from Snowflake query and convert to JSON.
* Use [JSON Schema](https://json-schema.org/understanding-json-schema/) to prepare a validation schema.
* Look up individual fields to determine their type and any allowed data, ranges, etc.
* [JSON Schema Type reference](https://json-schema.org/understanding-json-schema/reference/type.html)
* [Validate your schema](https://www.jsonschemavalidator.net/) - use your custom schema & sample JSON dataset to test this out.
* [RegExR](https://regexr.com/) - tool for building new regex expressions

### Time & Dates
* Our preferred format for dates is: `YYYY-MM-DD` 
* Our preferred format for datetime is `@TBD`
* Our servers run on GMT.
* Our dates are set to `@TBD` timezone in `standard` time.
* We (will) use lowercase attributes for `meta` data that is programatically updated, such as `published_date` - this matches most API implementations.

### Create a new data ingestion service
Example [`CovidVaccineEquity/worker.js`](./CovidVaccineEquity/worker.js).

1. Get access to database.
2. Pull sample data for review and creating validation schemas.
3. Review datasets and essential data with team.
4. Publish only data that is used and regularly monitored. Extra data not published to the web does not receive the necessary attention to confirm accuracy and can quickly get out of date.
5. Create data generation scripts and connect them to `worker.js` The name of the script should be matched as closely as possible to the public data label, and should be the same as resulting file name (case-sensitive).

### Naming conventions

It's important how shared resources are named.

A lot of headaches and errors can be saved by settings a naming convention everyone uses, and ensuring that naming convention matches the normal standard practices of industries & publishing scopes. This makes the code easier for others to contribute to, helps keep the code clean, and makes it easy to extend and add features. 

* [A Brief Guide to Clean Code: Naming Conventions](https://dev.to/danialmalik/a-beginner-s-guide-to-clean-code-part1-naming-conventions-139l)
* Book, "Clean Code: A Handbook of Agile Software Craftsmanship" - Robert C. Martin

**For Datasets & file names**

* Confirm with content team & review as a team. This makes it easier to task-switch if names are established and consistent. Example `CovidStateDashboardV2` > `infections-by-groups.js` > `infections-by-group.json`.
* Named datasets can be "Upper Camel Case". Example `CovidEquityData`. 
* Folder and code file names names can be *snake case* (underscore separated).
* Published JSON filenames should be *dash case* (dash separated).
* File names should be lowercase and separated by dashes. Example: `infections-by-group`.
* Region specific File names. Put the location at the end of the filename, `vaccinations-by-age-california`, `vaccinations-by-age-alameda`. 
* Use the root of the county, you do not need to include the word "county".
* Avoid misspellings and abbreviations. Though it's quicker to type, abbreviations are arbitrary and cause extra mental load on development teams. If you use a code editor like VS Code or Atom, autocomplete will fill in the rest of the word so you can do less typing.
* Remove unused data and scripts when no longer needed (and any refactors are complete). They are versioned in GitHub.

**Naming conventions for GitHub branches and pull requests** 

### Set up a new data service with pull requests and notifications
These services are connected in FaaS scripts. Example: [`CovidVaccineEquity/index.js`](./CovidVaccineEquity/index.js)

1. **Name new service.** Consult with team and existing datasets to determine best name & scope of data ahead of time. Format: `{Project}{Dataset}`
2. **Confirm publishing destination** 
3. **Agree on data approval process**
4. **Set up cron job** Confirm publishing schedule
5. **Set up notifications system.** Add any new slack channels & people being notified to project data tracker.

## Read more about our technology approach
* [Data pipelines](https://teamdocs.covid19.ca.gov/teams/engineering/data-pipelines/)
* [Serverless APIs](https://handbook.digital.ca.gov/tech/serverless/) in our design handbook.
* [Publishing pipeline](https://teamdocs.covid19.ca.gov/teams/engineering/publishing-pipeline/)
* [Public dashboards](https://teamdocs.covid19.ca.gov/teams/engineering/dashboards/)


## Other Code Practices

* We are using JSDocs for inline documentation.

